[0035] Revise matrix element accesses (#598)
microsoft/hlsl-specs: proposals/0035-linalg-matrix.md

          MatrixScope Scope>
class Matrix {
  using ElementType = typename __detail::ComponentTypeTraits<ComponentTy>::Type;

>   static const uint ElementsPerScalar = __detail::ComponentTypeTraits<ComponentTy>::IsNativeScalar ? 1 : 4;

Author: Ah yea... that's some silliness to deal with the 8-bit packed types where we put 4 of them into a uint32_t. Will add clarifications.

  static typename hlsl::enable_if<hlsl::is_arithmetic<T>::value, Matrix>::type
  Load(/*groupshared*/ T Arr[], uint StartIdx, uint Stride, bool ColMajor);

  template <MatrixUse UseLocal = Use>
  typename hlsl::enable_if<Use == MatrixUse::A && Scope == MatrixScope::Wave &&
                               UseLocal == Use,
                           Matrix>::type
      FromThreadVectors(vector<ElementType, MScalars>);

  template <MatrixUse UseLocal = Use>
  typename hlsl::enable_if<Use == MatrixUse::B && Scope == MatrixScope::Wave &&
                               UseLocal == Use,
                           Matrix>::type

>       FromThreadVectors(vector<ElementType, NScalars>);

Reviewer: Did you purposely leave off `MatrixUse::Accumulator` here (and `GetThreadVector()` below)? If so, a comment as to why would be useful

specified by the `Scope` parameter (e.g. a matrix with `Scope == Thread` is a
_matrix with thread scope_).

Matrix storage is always opaque, the `Scope` does not directly restrict how the
matrix is stored, it merely denotes allowed scopes of allowed data divergence.
A matrix with thread scope must behave as if each thread has a unique copy of
the matrix, however the storage is not required to be thread local, and an
implementation may coalesce identical matrices across threads.

#### Matrix Storage

In HLSL, matrix objects are intangible objects so they do not have defined size
or memory layout. When in use, implementations are expected to spread the
storage of matrices across the thread-local storage for all threads in a SIMD
unit. At the DXIL level we represent a matrix through a handle object.

An A matrix is a collection of per-thread vectors representing matrix rows,
while a B matrix is a collection of per-thread vectors representing matrix
columns.

> An Accumulator matrix may be either an A matrix, or a B matrix, and it varies by

Reviewer: One additional intrinsic that may be useful related to this is a query whether an accumulator matrix is an A or B type.

specified by the `Scope` parameter (e.g. a matrix with `Scope == Thread` is a
_matrix with thread scope_).

Matrix storage is always opaque, the `Scope` does not directly restrict how the
matrix is stored, it merely denotes allowed scopes of allowed data divergence.
A matrix with thread scope must behave as if each thread has a unique copy of
the matrix, however the storage is not required to be thread local, and an
implementation may coalesce identical matrices across threads.

#### Matrix Storage

In HLSL, matrix objects are intangible objects so they do not have defined size
or memory layout. When in use, implementations are expected to spread the
storage of matrices across the thread-local storage for all threads in a SIMD

> unit. At the DXIL level we represent a matrix through a handle object.

Reviewer 2: Are these two statements compatible?

> the storage is not required to be thread local, and an implementation may coalesce identical matrices across threads.

> implementations are expected to spread the storage of matrices across the thread-local storage for all threads in a SIMD unit

Author: Yes, although probably confusingly worded...

The point is that the _full_ storage for a matrix does not need to be materialized into a single thread, instead an implementation is expected to spread storage of matrices across thread-local storage for all threads in a SIMD unit.

be in any arithmetic or packed data type. If the type mismatches the target data
type of the matrix a data conversion is applied on load.

#### Matrix::FromThreadVectors

```c++
template <MatrixUse UseLocal = Use>
typename hlsl::enable_if<Use == MatrixUse::A && Scope == MatrixScope::Wave &&
                              UseLocal == Use,
                          Matrix>::type
    FromThreadVectors(vector<ElementType, MScalars>);

template <MatrixUse UseLocal = Use>
typename hlsl::enable_if<Use == MatrixUse::B && Scope == MatrixScope::Wave &&
                              UseLocal == Use,
                          Matrix>::type
    FromThreadVectors(vector<ElementType, NScalars>);
```

Produces a matrix from per-thread vectors. An A matrix is produced from
per-thread row vectors, while a B matrix is produced from per-thread column
vectors. The `FromThreadVectors` construction method is not available for
accumulator matrices which vary by hardware implementation.

When creating an A matrix, the N dimension must be less than or equal to the
wave size. When creating a B matrix, the M dimension must be less than or equal
to the wave size. Threads outside the matrix size are discarded.

> Must be called from wave-uniform control flow.

Reviewer: This seems like an unnecessary restriction. Wouldn't it be possible to partially pull a matrix from masked threads? Not 100% sure the use case (identity matrix loads, maybe?) but enforcing this might be power intensive if you only need certain portions of a matrix.

Author: I think we'd need to define what values get pulled from masked threads. Is it 0's or... something else?

between opaque matrices and groupshared memory are defined in the
[Conversions](#conversions) section below.

```llvm
declare void @dx.op.matrixLoadFromThreads.v[NUM][TY](
  immarg i32,            ; opcode
  %dx.types.MatrixRef *, ; matrix
  < NUM x [Ty]>,         ; Vector
  )
```

Populates a matrix from per-thread vectors. For an A matrix the NUM corresponds
to the M dimension while for a B matrix it corresponds to the N dimension. The
NUM must match the matrix corresponding dimension, unless the element is a
packed data type in which case it must be the number of 32-bit unsigned integers
used to store M elements. This operation may not be used on Accumulator
matrices.

> For an A matrix the N dimension must be less than or equal to the WaveSize. For
> a B matrix the M dimension must be less than or equal to the WaveSize. Values
> from additional threads are discarded.

Reviewer 3: Don't you mean the `K` dimension for both A and B matrix case?
```suggestion
For an A matrix the K dimension must be less than or equal to the WaveSize. For
a B matrix the K dimension must be less than or equal to the WaveSize. Values
from additional threads are discarded.
```

Author: This proposal doesn't consider `K` dimensions the way that the old WaveMatrix one did. All matrices are `M x N`, the `K` dimension only factors into the multiplication operations where the matrices are `M x K` and `K x N` to produce an `M x N` output.
